[Merl 377] Migration Guide (#1148)
wpengine/faustjs: internal/faustjs.org/docs/migrationPath/overview.mdx

**front-page.js**: For rendering your site’s front page.
**single.js**: For rendering a single post.
**page.js**: For rendering a static page (page post-type).
**category.js**: Representing category archive index pages.

The full list of templates are available at [WordPress Docs](https://developer.wordpress.org/themes/basics/template-hierarchy/#the-template-hierarchy-in-detail).
Bear in mind that not all types of templates are supported within Faust. You can check the dev console when you visit a page that gives you a hint of the available templates that this route will match:

<img
  src="/docs/img/possible-templates.png"
  alt="The list of possible templates as shown in the dev console"
/>

You can see an example of the hierarchy in the [blueprint project](https://github.com/wpengine/atlas-blueprint-portfolio/tree/main/wp-templates) where we provided implementations for the main templates.

## Overview of the changes needed in to migrate from GQty to Apollo

Given the above information, we can now list an brief overview of the changes needed in to migrate from GQty to Apollo.

> You can also review the code of this [Blueprint Project](https://github.com/wpengine/atlas-blueprint-portfolio/tree/main) that shows how the end result will look like.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::tip
Take a look at the [Blueprint Portfolio](https://github.com/wpengine/atlas-blueprint-portfolio/tree/main) for an example of a migrated project in Faust.
:::
```

> **1. Capture and migrate Presentational Components**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**1. Capture and Migrate Presentational Components**
```

> Create a list of components that can be reused into the new version of Faust and move them into the new projects folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a list of components that can be reused in the new version of Faust and move them into the new projects folder.
```

**2. Import Faust Dependencies**

> 

Reviewer: Do we want folks to remove any old `node_modules` first before the import?

Author: I think this one is implied.

Start by importing the Faust dependencies:

`npm i @faustwp/cli @faustwp/core graphql @apollo/client`

Change the `package.json` scripts to use the new faust cli:

```json title="package.json"
scripts": {
    "dev": "faust dev",
    "build": "faust build",
    "generate": "faust generatePossibleTypes",
    "start": "faust start",
    "lint": "faust lint"
	...
}
```

> **3. Use new Faust Configuration**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**3. Use New Faust Configuration**
```

Replace the `withFaust` configuration function with the new one:

For the `next.config.js`:

```js title="next.config.js"
// const { withFaust } = require('@faustjs/next');
const { withFaust, getWpHostname } = require('@faustwp/core');
```

For the `faust.config.js`:

```js title="faust.config.js"
import { setConfig } from '@faustwp/core';
import templates from './wp-templates';
import possibleTypes from './possibleTypes.json';

/**
 * @type {import('@faustwp/core').FaustConfig}
 **/
export default setConfig({
  templates,
  experimentalPlugins: [],
  possibleTypes,
});
```

> **4. Use new Faust Imports and Providers**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**4. Use new Faust Imports and Providers**

```

Replace old Faust references with the new ones:

For the api route:

```js title="pages/api/faust/[[...route]].js"
// import { apiRouter } from '@faustjs/core/api';
import { apiRouter } from '@faustwp/core';
```

For the `_app.js`:

```js title="_app.js"
import '../faust.config';
import React from 'react';
import { useRouter } from 'next/router';
import { FaustProvider } from '@faustwp/core';
import '../styles/main.scss';

export default function MyApp({ Component, pageProps }) {
  const router = useRouter();

  return (
    <>
      <FaustProvider pageProps={pageProps}>
        <Component {...pageProps} key={router.asPath} />
      </FaustProvider>
    </>
  );
}
```

> **5. Create the new wp-templates folder and include an index**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**5. Create the new wp-templates folder and include an index**

```

> The blueprint example project showcases how the components are structured and it's a great way to understand what needs to be done.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::tip
The blueprint example project showcases how the components are structured and is a great way to understand what changes to make during this step.
:::

```

Reviewer: A great suggestion! Is this Faust's blank scaffold Blake is working on this sprint? Or the portfolio?

Reviewer: If we can link to whichever blueprint this one references, I think that will be really helpful for clarity

You should be using the Apollo Client from now on to prepare queries and mutations.

> If you are not using the `wp-templates` system you can take a look a the [search.js](https://github.com/wpengine/atlas-blueprint-portfolio/blob/main/pages/search.js)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are not using the `wp-templates` system, you can take a look a the [search.js](https://github.com/wpengine/atlas-blueprint-portfolio/blob/main/pages/search.js)
```

For `pages/index.js` and `pages/[...wordpressNode].js`:

```js title="pages/index.js and pages/[...wordpressNode].js"
import { getWordPressProps, WordPressTemplate } from '@faustwp/core';

export default function Page(props) {
  return <WordPressTemplate {...props} />;
}

export function getStaticProps(ctx) {
  return getWordPressProps({ ctx });
}
```

For `pages/preview.js`:

```js title="pages/preview.js"
import { getWordPressProps, WordPressTemplate } from '@faustwp/core';

export default function Page(props) {
  return <WordPressTemplate {...props} />;
}
```

At this point you should be able to run the dev server and inpsect if something is missing or not working properly.
Fix them, rinse and repeat.

**7. Clean up any references of GQty**
Once everything is working with the new Faust, you should be able to remove any unused references to the old framework.

Those include:

* The `gqty.config.js`.
* The `client` folder.
* The `@faustjs/core`, `@faustjs/next` and `gqty` dependencies.
* Any [skeleton renders](https://gqty.dev/docs/intro/how-it-works#interplay-with-lists--keys) as a result of GQty side effects.

> ## Any new tools helpful in working with Apollo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Helpful Tools When Working with Apollo
```

> While migrating your app from GQty to Apollo, you will find Apollo Ecosystem has plenty of resources and tools to help you work with GraphQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While migrating your app from GQty to Apollo, you will find that the Apollo Ecosystem has plenty of resources and tools to help you work with GraphQL.
```

We list some of the available tools here that will definitely help you:

* **Apollo Client DevTools**: DevTools is a debugger toolbar for Chrome that allows you to inspect and perform queries against the GraphQL Endpoint within the browser.

>     This tools is invaluable when trying to migrate existing GQty hooks into Apollo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This tool is invaluable when trying to migrate existing GQty hooks into Apollo.
```

    [Link to Download](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/apollo-client-devtools/jdkknkkbebbapilgoeccciglkfbmbnfm)

> * **Apollo Fragments Guide**: Using the new Faust, you will have to write queries manually from now on. Using GraphQL fragments is a recommended way to share pieces of logic between multiple queries and mutations. Read [this guide](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/react/data/fragments/) for best practices and greate techniques to maximize using fragments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Apollo Fragments Guide**: Using the new Faust, you will need to write queries manually. Using GraphQL fragments is a recommended way to share pieces of logic between multiple queries and mutations. Read [this guide](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/react/data/fragments/) for best practices and great techniques to maximize using fragments.
```

slug: /migrationPath/overview
title: Migration from Legacy Faust
---

## General Guidelines

Currently, there is no great automated way to migrate from previous versions of Faust that use GQty to the recent version using Apollo. This is primarily due to their striking differences in the way the queries are performed.
However, there are some conventional techniques and best practices for React Development that will definitely help you with this process.

### Reusing Presentational Components
If you paid attention while developing your Faust website, the Components folder typically contains components that embody a presentational meaning.

By presentational we mean they do not depend on GQty or any hooks or side-effects and they just take props and render the data.
Here is an example of a presentational component taken from this [blueprint](https://github.com/wpengine/atlas-blueprint-portfolio/blob/main/components/PostInfo/PostInfo.js):

> ```js title="PostInfo.js"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```jsx title="PostInfo.js"
```

export default function PostInfo({ className, author, date }) {
  if (!date && !author) {
    return null;
  }

  return (
    <div className={className}>
      {date && (
        <time dateTime={date}>
          <FormatDate date={date} />
        </time>
      )}
      {date && author && <>&nbsp;</>}
      {author && <span>By {author}</span>}
    </div>
  );
}
```

> There is no reference to GQty or Apollo and this component can be safely re-used accross different applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is no reference to GQty or Apollo and this component can be safely re-used across different applications.
```

On the other hand the following component is harder to migrate as it depends on the GQty client:

> ```js title="NavigationMenu.js"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```jsx title="NavigationMenu.js"
```

export default function NavigationMenu({ className, menuLocation, children }) {
  const { useQuery } = client;
  const { nodes: menuItems } = useQuery().menuItems({
    where: {
      location: menuLocation,
    },
  });
  ...
```
You will have to either replace the `useQuery()` from GQty with the `useQuery()` of Apollo or perform the query on a higher level and pass on the menu items as props:

> ```js title="NavigationMenu.js"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```jsx title="NavigationMenu.js"
```

export default function NavigationMenu({ menuItems, className, children }) {
  if (!menuItems) {
    return null;
  }
  return (
    <nav>...</nav>
  );
}
```

If you developed your components using this approach, you will be able to just transfer them without modifications to the new framework.

### Writing GraphQL Queries
The biggest hurdle when migrating from GQty to Apollo is that now you will need to write queries manually.
However this is not as bad as you think. You only need to identify the data that your pages and components need and try to request the appropriate fields.

For instance take a look at the `PostInfo` component we posted before. It is supposed to display the `Post` Information using the `author` and `date` fields.
You can request those fields once in the post or page fragment:

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```graphql
```

fragment PostsItemFragment on Post {
    id
    date
    uri
    title
    author {
    	node {
        	name
    	}
    }
}
```

> This fragment is reusable and can be applied to any page query when requsting the Post data fields:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This fragment is reusable and can be applied to any page query when requesting the Post data fields:
```

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```graphql
```

Change the `package.json` scripts to use the new faust cli:

```json title="package.json"
scripts": {
    "dev": "faust dev",
    "build": "faust build",
    "generate": "faust generatePossibleTypes",
    "start": "faust start",
    "lint": "faust lint"
	...
}
```

**3. Use new Faust Configuration**

Replace the `withFaust` configuration function with the new one:

For the `next.config.js`:

```js title="next.config.js"
// const { withFaust } = require('@faustjs/next');
const { withFaust, getWpHostname } = require('@faustwp/core');
```

For the `faust.config.js`:

```js title="faust.config.js"
import { setConfig } from '@faustwp/core';
import templates from './wp-templates';
import possibleTypes from './possibleTypes.json';

/**
 * @type {import('@faustwp/core').FaustConfig}
 **/
export default setConfig({
  templates,
  experimentalPlugins: [],
  possibleTypes,
});
```

**4. Use new Faust Imports and Providers**
Replace old Faust references with the new ones:

For the api route:

```js title="pages/api/faust/[[...route]].js"
// import { apiRouter } from '@faustjs/core/api';
import { apiRouter } from '@faustwp/core';
```

For the `_app.js`:

> ```js title="_app.js"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```jsx title="_app.js"
```

import '../faust.config';
import React from 'react';
import { useRouter } from 'next/router';
import { FaustProvider } from '@faustwp/core';
import '../styles/main.scss';

export default function MyApp({ Component, pageProps }) {
  const router = useRouter();

  return (
    <>
      <FaustProvider pageProps={pageProps}>
        <Component {...pageProps} key={router.asPath} />
      </FaustProvider>
    </>
  );
}
```

**5. Create the new wp-templates folder and include an index**
The blueprint example project showcases how the components are structured and it's a great way to understand what needs to be done.
You should be using the Apollo Client from now on to prepare queries and mutations.

If you are not using the `wp-templates` system, you can take a look a the [search.js](https://github.com/wpengine/atlas-blueprint-portfolio/blob/main/pages/search.js)
component which uses the next.js `getNextStaticProps` page helpers.

**6. Add the `WordPressTemplate` and `getWordPressProps` when using Template Hierarchy**

For `pages/index.js` and `pages/[...wordpressNode].js`:

> ```js title="pages/index.js and pages/[...wordpressNode].js"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```jsx title="pages/index.js and pages/[...wordpressNode].js"
```

import { getWordPressProps, WordPressTemplate } from '@faustwp/core';

export default function Page(props) {
  return <WordPressTemplate {...props} />;
}

export function getStaticProps(ctx) {
  return getWordPressProps({ ctx });
}
```

For `pages/preview.js`:

> ```js title="pages/preview.js"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```jsx title="pages/preview.js"
```

import { getWordPressProps, WordPressTemplate } from '@faustwp/core';

export default function Page(props) {
  return <WordPressTemplate {...props} />;
}
```

> At this point you should be able to run the dev server and inpsect if something is missing or not working properly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At this point you should be able to run the dev server and inspect if something is missing or not working properly.
```

slug: /migrationPath/overview
title: Migration from Legacy Faust
---

## General Guidelines

> Currently, there is no great automated way to migrate from previous versions of Faust that use GQty to the recent version using Apollo. This is primarily due to their striking differences in the way the queries are performed.

Reviewer 3: I would make sure the language stays very positive. Maybe change things like "no great automated way" to something like "Currently migration from previous versions of Faust that use GQty is a manual process. To make the process easier we have outlined the necessary steps below."

However, there are some conventional techniques and best practices for React Development that will definitely help you with this process.

### Reusing Presentational Components

> If you paid attention while developing your Faust website, the Components folder typically contains components that embody a presentational meaning.

Reviewer 3: I wouldn't say things like "If you paid attention", that seems a little rude or condescending.

By presentational we mean they do not depend on GQty or any hooks or side-effects and they just take props and render the data.
Here is an example of a presentational component taken from this [blueprint](https://github.com/wpengine/atlas-blueprint-portfolio/blob/main/components/PostInfo/PostInfo.js):

```jsx title="PostInfo.js"
export default function PostInfo({ className, author, date }) {
  if (!date && !author) {
    return null;
  }

  return (
    <div className={className}>
      {date && (
        <time dateTime={date}>
          <FormatDate date={date} />
        </time>
      )}
      {date && author && <>&nbsp;</>}
      {author && <span>By {author}</span>}
    </div>
  );
}
```

There is no reference to GQty or Apollo and this component can be safely re-used across different applications.

> On the other hand the following component is harder to migrate as it depends on the GQty client:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On the other hand the following component is more difficult to migrate as it depends on the GQty client:
```

```jsx title="NavigationMenu.js"
export default function NavigationMenu({ className, menuLocation, children }) {
  const { useQuery } = client;
  const { nodes: menuItems } = useQuery().menuItems({
    where: {
      location: menuLocation,
    },
  });
  ...
```
You will have to either replace the `useQuery()` from GQty with the `useQuery()` of Apollo or perform the query on a higher level and pass on the menu items as props:

```jsx title="NavigationMenu.js"
export default function NavigationMenu({ menuItems, className, children }) {
  if (!menuItems) {
    return null;
  }
  return (
    <nav>...</nav>
  );
}
```

If you developed your components using this approach, you will be able to just transfer them without modifications to the new framework.

### Writing GraphQL Queries
The biggest hurdle when migrating from GQty to Apollo is that now you will need to write queries manually.

> However this is not as bad as you think. You only need to identify the data that your pages and components need and try to request the appropriate fields.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You just need to identify the data that your pages and components need and try to request the appropriate fields.
```
